---
title: Harness your biochemistry to boost performance and well-being
date: 2019-03-23T09:38:02.116Z
image: /img/attractive-beautiful-cheerful-1536619.jpg
---
Imagine walking on a bridge towards your most important opportunity ever, you're about to make it or loose it. Whether or not you will is highly affected by your mental state, whether you're anxious or excited. Your experience is dependent on your past neural network activity, (in ways we don't fully understand) feeding into the present neural network activity of your brain. Your current amounts of different building blocks for various neurotransmittors and the amount of deep sleep will also play a role in the level of fear, excitement or zen you feel. 

Harnessing your biochemistry could mean using the thinking you've gotten into the habit of engaging in slightly differently. Just a mental shift from being the fear to being an observer of that content of consciousness can be a performance-booster and increase well-being significantly. That shift is biochemically dependent, to the exact same extent which the reduction in anxiety you may experience from alcohol or exercise is. 

Using the belief that every detail of your experience is purely biochemical can have several effects on a mind, dependent on that minds biochemical pre-dispositions. Personally I've had a growth curve that I'm very grateful for as a result of adaption of this truth as a component of my default perspective to experience, work and life.

That's not to say I haven't had moments of super-poor performance and very low levels of well-being. But the mental affirmation of the nature of being human, has led me to grow a certain mental muscle. This metaphorical muscle is dependent on neuronal activation in certain areas of the central and peripheral nervous system, and the nutrients and oxygen these neurons have available and use. One might argue that this reductionistic view has the potential to be psychologically inhibiting, contributing to a feeling of limitation, because of the lack of room for free will. To these sorts of thoughts, I'd mentally affirm that it, the thought, is also dependent on biochemistry. Thereby it is something I can biohack my way out of, in the broadest use of the term biohacking. 

There has been many scientific papers published, so many that mentioning one would not represent the true vastness of the proof for this, showing that mindfulness has many benefits for well-being and different fields of performance. This is where the mental muscle I mentioned earlier comes in. Combining mindfulness, pure observation, awareness to what is, with the truth of our biochemical nature can lead to extraordinary levels of self-control, deliberate decision-making & reduction of suffering. As you observe, by using relevant areas of the brain, you start to see how the I, the free will and the ego are really only creations of your mind. As you see this, with enough practice I truly believe you can completely eliminate all suffering, mathematically leading to pure well-being. Then there's the performance aspect of it, as you use this awareness-muscle of the mind, you start experiencing distractions from your work in a new way. You still experience the urge to get unproductive, but as you have trained your biochemically dependent inner Buddha, you can mindfully let that urge pass.

Personally I find that my ability to be mindful is highly dependent on what I've exposed my body and mind to in the short- to medium-term. Sources of exposures could be substances such as sugar, nootropics or alchohol, but also inside-out exposures such as exercise, social interaction, sleep and mindfulness itself. These are easier to get right the longer you practice them, as you accrue power over time to proactively, deliberately say no to the ego and say yes to what is fulfilling for you and your longer-term purpose. 

There are risks to any biochemical manipulation, but there are also rewards, following the nature-compatible heuristic of anti-fragility (Nassim Nicholas Taleb, [On Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/Antifragile-Things-That-Disorder-Incerto/dp/0812979680)) has helped me a lot for avoiding the lows and always experiencing well-being and productivity. When you get it right, the habitual neuronal activation of mindful experiences are truly beautiful and useful.

Written by David Rönnlid
