---
title: Use fractals & nature to make better decisions
date: 2019-04-22T09:17:28.467Z
image: /img/fractal.jpg
---
Fractals are geometrical patterns in which viewing different levels of zoom will result in seeing very similar patterns, in smaller or larger sizes. 

[View an awesome example from nature.](https://www.adventure-journal.com/2017/04/nature-soothing-might-fractals/)

The process by which these patterns have evolved in nature, in which they are very common, is evolution. That's right. Evolution is not only about individuals in species of animals. The concept of survival of the fittest can be extrapolated to almost any complex system of reality you can think of that can be studied mathematically and statistically. The anti-fragility, tendency to gain from stressors after a period of recovery, of these complex systems, is an evolutionary process of growth over time. Just as you learn from your mistakes, so does nature by the eradication of what doesn't work in a certain system. 

Let's have an example: a tree. It has many different sources of stressors, physical forces trying to inhibit its existence, for example air pressure and animals eating its leaves. I'm no expert on trees, but you get the point, the complex system of a tree is exposed to dangers, from which it needs to secure itself.

Let's take it to the next stage: we have two trees, tree A is exactly like tree B, except for its stem, which is fragile to animals eating it, because of it only having one button which the animals have to touch and the animal would magically receive all the calories of the leaves. Preposterous, I know, but it will illustrate something that could change your life. So, tree A, with the properties of a normal tree in 2019, after millions of years of evolution, has a well-developed, robust defense-system in its stem, while tree B, recently invented by the invention of my human mind, is fragile to the touch of an animal. It's clear that tree A has a bigger probability of survival and would therefore be favored by the laws of natural selection. The fact that tree A has outsourced the fragility of its stem to the stems by-and-large independent and inter-changable sub-parts as opposed to the single button of tree B is the fact which will make it more fit in the context of evolution. The context of evolution being the many different stressors that the trees are exposed to, such as the chewing or touching on the stem by animals.

Sooo, having many sub-parts that are independent and inter-changeable is a method for surviving and staying robust in the presence of exposure to stressors. But weren't we looking for something more than being robust, like being anti-fragile? Yes! Tree will not only not die for a long time, but as some of its fragile sub-parts get eradicated the spots will be replaced. This process could be random, with the places being randomly filled in, and yet, these wholes would eventually, with a huge amount of iterations, end up with a greater robustness than with fewer iterations of existing in the presence of stressors. Stronger sub-parts make stronger systems, stronger players stronger teams.

Nature, by means of large amount of time, iterations of various stressors on various systems, has had its animals, plants and other geometrical objects become fractal because its blind method of de-centralizing the risk of dying to the inter-changeable sub-parts of the sub-parts of nature itself. 

Now we'll see how you can re-align yourself with your fractal nature to make more informed and well thought-through decisions.

A fractal antenna can receive signals from a longer distance with greater accuracy due to its de-centralization over space, it has a larger surface-area of information-gathering than a normal antenna. If you would become more like a fractal antenna in your information-gathering by becoming more present, reducing pre-conceived notions blocking you from seeing what reality you are actually in, you'll get a more accurate understanding of the context you have to make decisions in. This is because you've gathered more information. But if you completely give up all thoughts and interpretations you have of the situation, that would mean there's no interpreter to make the decision at all. Instead, trying to mindfully have thoughts, as many and as complex as possible, as principles gathered by large amounts of iterations of experience, is what I suggest as a method of decision-making as a nature-compatible method for being anti-fragile to any environment. I'm suggesting that you give up your mental attachment to your thoughts and evaluate them in their context of how they will help you achieve your goals. Having the thoughts be inter-changeable parts of the complex system of your mind will combined with the fractal input-system of being more present and aware lead to vast amounts of information being interpreted by an anti-fragile system. Over time you will grow both your neural awareness-networks and interpreter-networks, providing all you need for a situation-independent success-machine.
